---
title: "Bradley Johnson: Ballad of a Broken Team"
date: 2020-12-19
image: "images/post/bradley-johnson.jpg"
author: "Alex Davidson" 
description: "A post on the Derby County of Bradley Johnson"
categories: ["article", "player"]
tags: ["key player"]
podcastPath: "Episode-3---Bradley-Johnson-Ballad-of-a-Broken-Team-eo394b"
draft: false
---

Last weekend, Derby celebrated a four game unbeaten run as they inched
their way closer to the _feted_ 21st position in the league table. On
the same day, Bradley Johnson, a former player, recorded his 500th start
in career football. Over 4 years, Johnson made nearly 150 appearances
for Derby. Initially overshadowed by a record transfer fee; eventually
becoming a well-liked and integral part of the club's midfield.

Leaving in 2019, Bradley Johnson has continued to play consistently for
league rivals Blackburn Rovers -- scoring twice earlier this season in a
4-0 win at Pride Park. Today, we wonder whether the career arc of
Johnson: unfairly maligned for being played in poorly designed systems,
and then finally being let go too soon; is emblematic of a squad culture
that encourages the systemically poor management of individual players.
Essentially, fostering a playing policy that fails to highlight the
talents available in the squad, and subsequently laying the blame for
any consequent failures on the players themselves.

## A record signing

In Paul Clement's first managerial role after arriving from Bayern
München in Summer 2015, Derby embarked on the sort of spending
extravaganza that leaves Championship clubs saddled with years of
crippling obligations that they are incapable of meeting for years
afterwards. That is, without earning promotion anyway.

The previous season, Derby had finished 8th; managing somehow to
compromise their position at the top of the table that they had enjoyed
at the beginning of March. In the summer, as well as permanently signing
some of the impressive loan players that had arrived the previous
January, it was seemingly decided that the squad was merely an expansive
transfer window away from the Premier League. Breaking the years old
transfer fee record for Tom Ince was the statement signing, until
deadline day.

Unfortunately, injuries had struck at the very start of the season.
Player of the previous season, Will Hughes was ruled out for most of the
coming season on the very first day. Craig Bryson would also be an
unfortunate injury victim in the same game. This left Derby with a
midfield stripped of two key players, and very light on replacements.

On the final day of the window, after a defeat at home to Leeds followed
four draws, Derby pulled the trigger again. In came Jacob Butterfield
and Bradley Johnson, for ~£4 million from Huddersfield and ~£6 million
from Norwich, respectively. Both central midfielders had impressed with
their goalscoring ability in the previous season: Johnson, having scored
15 goals from the left of a diamond as Norwich gained promotion, was
ultimately deemed expendable in a Premier League setting. At the age of
28, Johnson was the kind of "here-and-now" signing that Derby had not
made since their return to the Championship.

The fee for Johnson broke Derby's transfer fee record for the second
time in the window. This signing established that Derby believed that
they had the squad to spend their way out of the division. Externally,
this transfer window would cultivate the impression of Derby as being
lavish spenders that would last for seasons afterwards. Bradley
Johnson's arrival seemed drawn up out of thin air, rather than as a part
of any sort of coherent plan about how he would benefit Derby's
midfield. His referral to the club by the wrong name after signing
illustrating perhaps the haste that the deal was completed in.

<iframe width="100%" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/EI366o9Zbxw?start=46" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<br><br><br>

## An imbalanced midfield

Bradley Johnson would come in to the side on the left hand side of a
midfield of a three. While he scored a small number of goals during a
sequence of results that saw Derby rise to the top of the table, it
never really seemed clear what was truly being arranged in the centre of
that midfield. Johnson contrasted with the more cultured midfield
presences of Jeff Hendrick and Jacob Butterfield in offering a more
combative approach. With the de-facto defensive shield of George Thorne
unable to consistently stay fit, Johnson's physical characteristics led
him to having to do more of the defensive work than he had previously
been used to.

At Norwich, Johnson operated with a defensive shield behind, and a
creative presence in front, which allowed him to focus on his own game
and goalscoring. At Derby, his role required much more care. There was
no attacking midfielder to create ahead of him, and there wasn't a
defensive shield to protect the defence. When results turned for the
worse in the new year, one of the noticeable flaws of Derby's system was
that it relied on Johnson for work that he was never really signed to
do. His place in the team became uncertain, but results didn't really
improve when he was eventually dropped.

After Paul Clement was sacked at the start of 2016, and Derby abandoned
defensive practice for more attacking thrust, Johnson's reinstatement in
the centre of play, with Thorne returning as the defensive coordinator,
coincided with an upturn in results. Johnson's two goals in the 4-0
thrashing of playoff rivals Hull City illuminated the potential that
existed when he was relinquished of defensive responsibility.

<br>
<iframe width="100%" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/bUe59M6D3Wc" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<br><br>

But the first leg of the playoffs that season, this time a 3-0 defeat
against Hull, would see him held responsible for a performance that
would effectively end any chance of Derby achieving promotion. After
losing Thorne again to injury in the final game of the season, Johnson
was yet again relied on for a defensive presence that he was not used
to. After being substituted early in the second half, he would not
reappear for the second leg consolation victory. At this point, it was
difficult to believe that the club had spent wisely in acquiring him.

## An evolution

Signed on a four-year contract, the rest of Johnson's Derby career
followed the same undulating rhythm that had been established in his
first season. Periods of good performances, broken up by periods where
the form of the team dipped dramatically. During these periods, his form
would inevitably suffer as a result. 

It initially seemed that the team as a whole were the victims of the
inconsistent performances of individuals like Johnson that were
apparently out-of-form. But Johnson's resilient character meant that he
would always be eventually reintegrated back after time on the bench. On
the whole, Derby's best performances over the four years of Johnson's
stay were achieved whilst he played his best football for the club. The
seven game winning streak at the start of McClaren's second managerial
tenure included Bradley Johnson being reintegrated after being initially
dropped under Nigel Pearson. Under Gary Rowett, he returned to the side
towards the end of the season as the club found a new 5-3-2 system that
saw them make it into the playoffs. In his final season under Frank
Lampard, Johnson finally became the defensive pivot that many managers
had tried to force him into being in previous seasons. His importance in
the role was highlighted perfectly in Derbys 4-2 win away at Leeds in
the playoff second leg, allowing the rest of the team to coordinate an
attacking display that left him with almost the entire defensive
responsibility. Ironically, allowing Johnson to take such an attacking
role during his Derby career may have seen the club get the best out of
him, but it had never really seemed like a possibility.

<br>
<iframe width="100%" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Dj5z6tfhI7U?start=76" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<br><br>

As a record signing midfielder expected to consistently score goals and
single-handedly drag Derby towards to the top division, Bradley Johnson
cannot be considered a true success. But it was his self-motivation in
continually adapting to the demands expected of him, alongside a fierce
refusal to be sidelined, that define him as a uniquely determined part
of Derby's midfield. His long-term performances are all the more
impressive considering the sheer number of different systems and
managerial upheavals that he had to adjust for.

Even in his final season, it was believed that he had likely ended his
Derby career prematurely, when he was banned for four matches after
biting Joe Allen during a defeat at Stoke City. Instead, and as always,
Johnson returned to become a key member of the team. In a midfield that
had little defensive instinct, he successfully modified his game to
provide the defensive restraint that was missing from the rest of the
squad. It was his fearsome physical presence that was crucial in
solidifying what would be a very typically weak Lampardian defence.

By the time he left at the end of the 2019, it wasn't clear whether
there was anyone at the club that could replace him. Under Philip Cocu,
Derby experimented with the sort of 4-3-3 that Derby had finished the
2019 season with, but poor results meant that Derby eventually had to
adopt a two-player shield where there had previously only been a single
pivot. The fact that two bodies were now required to shield a defence
that had not dramatically changed from the season before, would add
weight to the belief that Derby had underestimated the impact of letting
a player of Johnson's ability leave for nothing.

## Systemic issues

When he returned to Pride Park this season, Bradley Johnson scored
_twice_ in Blackburn's 4-0 win. His performance showcased the sort of
goalscoring ability that had never really disappeared, but that Derby
were unable to unlock. Such performances really underline how important
it is that players are signed with coherent systems in mind. Until his
fifteen goal season at Norwich, his raw attacking stats were consistent,
if not remarkable. Such anomalous seasons generally allude to a player
that has finally found his fit into a team structure, rather than the
unlocking of some previously unearthed talent.

The problem with Johnson's arrival at Derby was that it was entirely
motivated by the assumption of him being a universal goalscoring
midfielder. One of those rare players that you could take anywhere and
they would succeed. The formation he was placed into required much more
from him in terms of maintaining the general structure, and this
consequently lead to him never realising the same kind of performances.
Players like Chris Martin, Craig Bryson, George Thorne have shown to
Derby fans how wedded they are to a particular system, as much as the
system is wedded to them. Johnson's ability to adapt his game made him a
uniquely valued member of the team, but it came at the expense of him
never really being played in his preferred position. At a greater cost,
was that his relationship with the fans only really saw him widely
appreciated towards the end of his Derby career.

In some sense, he got off lightly. Many careers have taken nosedives
since Derby's spending spree of 2015 failed to manifest into a
promotion. Every year the urgency around the club to find success,
coupled with the declining squad quality and unsustainable expenditure,
always defaulted to seeking out new scapegoats that could be blamed for
failing. Ultimately, this has helped to shield the vast incompetencies
of the higher-ups that have never created an environment where managers
and/or players can enjoy established rhythms of success. More bizarrely,
Johnson's exit from Derby came at a time where he had finally become
integral to the team, a well-liked presence by both the fans, and his
fellow team members. The nature of his departure was echoed more
recently in the exit of Chris Martin, leaving behind him a similar void
up front that no-one else could really fill.

## A waste of potential

Since the summer of 2019, the fortunes of Derby County have gradually
declined to the point where they now sit in the Championship relegation
zone. It would be probably be an unfair conclusion to draw that this was
down to Johnson's departure. Having said that, the exit of a consistent
performer, who was once a club record signing, on a free transfer to a
Championship rival appears like an odd deal to sanction. Most likely,
this is symptomatic of a club culture that has grown to prioritise
establishing creative accounting practices, rather than constructing
footballing philosophies that aim to achieve long-term success.

Of course, it is difficult to say anything with certainty. But, as
Bradley Johnson made his 500th start, Derby drew at home with Stoke City
to go level on points with Nottingham Forest in a battle to escape the
Championship relegation zone. It's easy to come to the conclusion that
Derby have simply made multiple ill-informed and costly decisions
regarding playing personnel. Johnson's Derby career posits the
hypothesis that it's just as likely that the players they had were good
enough all along. It's just that nobody at the top ever considered it
their responsibility to know how to get the best from them.
