---
title: "Bradley Johnson"
date: 2020-12-20- 
image: "images/post/bradley-johnson.jpg"
author: "Alex Davidson" 
description: "A post on the Derby County of Bradley Johnson"
categories: ["article", "player"]
tags: ["key player"]
podcastPath: ""
draft: false
---

Last weekend, Derby celebrated making it four games unbeaten as they
continue to inch their way closer to the feted 21st position in the
league table. On the same day, Bradley Johnson, a former player,
recorded his 500th start in career football. Over 4 years, Johnson made
nearly 150 appearances for Derby; initially overshadowed by a record
transfer fee, but eventually becoming a well-liked and integral part of
the club's midfield.

Leaving in 2019, Bradley Johnson has continued to play consistently for
league rivals Blackburn Rovers, scoring twice earlier this season in a
4-0 win at Pride Park. Today, we wonder whether the career arc of
Johnson: unfairly maligned for being played in poorly designed systems,
and then finally being let go too soon; is emblematic of the
systemically poor management of individual players. A policy that fails
to highlight all of the talents available in the squad, and subsequently
blaming such failures on the players themselves.

## A record signing

In Paul Clement's first managerial role after arriving from Bayern
München in Summer 2015, Derby embarked on the sort of spending
extravaganza that can leave a Championship club saddled with years of
crippling obligations that it is incapable of meeting for year
afterwards. Without earning promotion, that is.

The previous season, Derby had finished 8th; managing somehow to
compromise their position at the top of the table from the beginning of
March. As well as permanently signing some of the impressive loan
players that had arrived in January, it was seemingly decided that the
squad a healthy transfer window away from the Premier League. Until
deadline day, breaking the years old transfer fee record for Tom Ince
seemed like the statement signing of the summer.

Unfortunately injuries struck at the very start of the season. Player of
the previous season, Will Hughes was ruled out for most of the coming
season on the very first day, Craig Bryson also being an unfortunate
injury victim in the same game. This left Derby with a midfield stripped
of two key players, and very light on replacements.

On deadline day, after a defeat at home to Leeds followed four draws,
Derby pulled the trigger again. In came Jacob Butterfield and Bradley
Johnson, for ~£4 million from Huddersfield and ~£6 million from Norwich,
respectively. Both central midfielders had impressed with their
goalscoring ability in the previous season: Johnson having scored 15
goals from the left of a diamond as Norwich gained promotion, but
ultimately deemed expendable in a Premier League setting. At the age of
28, Johnson was the kind of "here-and-now" signing that Derby had not
made since their return to the championship.

The fee for Johnson broke Derby's transfer fee record for the second
time in the window, establishing that Derby believed that they had the
squad to spend their way out of the division. It seemed a transfer drawn
up out of thin air, rather than having any coherent plan about how
Johnson would benefit Derby's midfield in real terms. His referral to
the club by the wrong name on arrival, perhaps illustrating the haste
that the signing was made in.

<iframe width="100%" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/EI366o9Zbxw?start=46" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## An imbalanced midfield

Bradley Johnson would come in to the side on the left hand side of a
midfield of a three. While some goals came and results saw Derby rise to
the top of the table, it never really seemed clear what was being
arranged in the centre of midfield. Johnson contrasted with the more
cultured midfielders such as Jeff Hendrick and Jacob Butterfield in
offering a combative presence. With the de-facto defensive shield of
George Thorne unable to consistently stay fit, perhaps Johnson's
physical characteristics led to him having to do more of the defensive
work than he had previously been used to.

At Norwich, Johnson operated with a defensive shield behind, and a
creative presence in front, which allowed him to focus on his own game
and goalscoring. At Derby, his role required much more thought. There
was no attacking midfielder to create ahead of him, and there wasn't a
defensive shield to protect the defence. When results turned for the
worse in the new year, one of the noticeable flaws of Derby's system was
that it relied on him for work that he was never really signed to do.
His place in the team became uncertain, but results didn't really
improve.

After Clement was sacked and Derby abandoned defensive practice for more
attacking thrust, Johnson's reinstatement in the centre of play, with
Thorne back acting as the defensive coordinator coincided with an upturn
in results. Johnson's two goals in the 4-0 thrashing of playoff rivals
Hull City illuminating the potential that existed when he was unleashed
of responsibility.

[Highlights of Hull]()

But the playoff first leg that season, this time a 3-0 defeat against
Hull, would see him held responsible for a performance that would
effectively end any chance of Derby achieving promotion. After losing
Thorne again to injury, Johnson was relied on for a defensive presence
that he had never previously showed. After being substituted early in
the second half, he would not reappear for the second leg consolation
victory, and it seemed difficult to believe that the club had spent
wisely in acquiring him.

## An evolution

Signed on a four-year contract, the rest of Johnson's Derby career
followed the same undulating rhythm that had been established in his
first season. Periods of good performances broken up by periods where
the form of the team dropped dramatically, his form likewise inevitably
suffering. 

It initially seemed that the team as a whole were the victims of the
inconsistent performances of individuals like Johnson that were
apparently out-of-form. But his resilient character meant that he would
always eventually be reintegrated back after time on the bench. On the
whole, Derby's best performances over the four years of Johnson's stay
were achieved whilst he played his best football for the club. The seven
game winning streak at the start of McClaren's second managerial tenure
included Bradley Johnson being reinstated after being initially dropped
under Nigel Pearson. Under Gary Rowett, he returned to the side towards
the end of the season as the club found a new system that saw them make
it into the playoffs. In his final season under Frank Lampard, Johnson
finally became the defensive pivot that many managers had tried to force
him into being. His importance in the role was highlighted perfectly in
Derbys 4-2 win away at Leeds in the playoff second leg, allowing the
rest of the midfield and forwards to attack without restrictions.
Ironically a role that was never really afforded to him.

[Video of goal?]()

As a record signing midfielder expected to consistently score goals and
single-handedly drag Derby back to the top division, Bradley Johnson
cannot be considered a true success. On the other hand, his continual
adaptation to the demands expected of him made it impossible to ever
write him off. In his final season, it was postulated that he had ended
his Derby career early when he was banned for four matches after being
banned for biting Joe Allen after a 2-0 defeat at Stoke City. In a
midfield that had little defensive instinct, Johnson modified his game
to provide restraint; utilising his existing qualities as a fearsome
physical presence to solidify a typically Lampardian defence.

By the time he left at the end of the 2019, it wasn't clear whether
there was anyone at the club that could replace him. Under Philip Cocu,
Derby experimented with the sort of 4-3-3 that Derby had finished the
2019 season with, but poor results meant that Derby eventually had to
adopt a two-player pivot where there had previously only been one. 

## Systemic issues

When he returned to Pride Park this season, Bradley Johnson scored
_twice_ in Blackburn's 4-0 win. It was the sort of goalscoring ability
that had never really left him, but that Derby were unable to unlock.
Such performances really highlight how important it is that players are
signed with coherent systems in mind. Until his fifteen goal season at
Norwich, his raw stats were consistent, if not remarkable. Such
anomalies generally allude to a player finally being fit into a team
structure that "works", rather than the unlocking of some previously
unearthed talent.

The problem with Johnson's arrival at Derby was that it was entirely
motivated by the assumption of him being a universal goalscoring
midfielder. The formation he was placed into required much more from him
in terms of maintaining the general structure, and this ultimately lead
to him never realising the same kind of performances. Players like Chris
Martin, Craig Bryson, George Thorne have shown to Derby how wedded they
are to a particular system, as much as the system is wedded to them.
Johnson's ability to adapt his game made him a continually valued member
of the team, but it came at the expense of never really being played in
his preferred position. At a greater cost was that his relationship with
the fans only really saw him widely appreciated towards the end of his
Derby career. 

In some sense, he got off lightly. Many careers have taken nosedives
since Derby's spending spree of 2015 failed to manifest into a
promotion. Every year the urgency around the club to find success,
coupled with the declining squad quality and unsustainable expenditure,
always defaulted to seeking out new scapegoats that could be blamed for
failing. Ultimately, this has helped to shield the vast incompetencies
of the executives that have never created an environment where managers
and/or players can enjoy established rhythms of success. More bizarrely,
Johnson's exit from Derby came at a strange time where he had finally
become integral to the team, a departure that was echoed recently when
Chris Martin was allowed to leave.

## A waste of potential

Since the summer of 2019, the fortunes of Derby County have gradually
declined to the point where they now sit in the Championship relegation
zone. It would be probably be an unnatural conclusion to draw that this
was down to Johnson's departure. Having said that, the departure of a
consistent performer, who was once a club record signing, on a free
transfer to a Championship rival appears like an odd deal to strike.
Probably, this is symptomatic of a club culture that has grown to
prioritise establishing creative accounting practices, rather than
constructing footballing philosophies that aim to achieve long-term
success.

Of course, it is difficult to say anything with certainty. But, as
Bradley Johnson made his 500th start, Derby drew at home with Stoke City
to go level on points with Nottingham Forest in a battle to escape the
relegation zone. It's easy to come to the conclusion that Derby have
made multiple ill-informed and costly decisions regarding playing
personnel. Johnson's Derby career illuminates the possibility that it's
just as likely that the players they had were good enough all along,
it's just that nobody at the top ever considered it their responsibility
to know how to get the best from them.
