---
title: "Golaço: Tommy Smith vs Nottingham Forest, 2004"
date: 2021-01-16
image: "images/post/golaco-tommy-smith.jpeg"
author: "Alex Davidson" 
description: "Looking back at Tommy Smith's goal against Nottingham
Forest in 2004"
categories: ["article", "goal"]
tags: ["memorable goal", "burley era"]
podcastPath: "Episode-5---Golao-Tommy-Smith-vs-Nottingham-Forest--2004-ep4e5h"
draft: false
---

There are fewer things that capture the artistry of the Football
Narrative, as when a set of individual, unassuming parts unpredictably
form into a coherent whole. There are the matches, where one side plays
with the irrepressible urge to humiliate a seemingly equal opposition:
[Man City at Old Trafford](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NErYxJnMqwc);
[Germany against Brazil](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aE4BdIP6bvc);
[Barcelona against Real
Madrid](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jeiu7y-a220). Undoubtedly more
impressive are the teams that define their overachievement over a
prolonged period of time: Blackpool in 2010; Atalanta in 2020; Greece in
2004; and, of course, Leicester in 2016.

Such periods can catalyse an instantaneous change in a football team's
status. It's just as likely that they mysteriously disappear into the
mist that hugs the close season. Leaving no trace, except for the myth of
an ancient beast that previously ruled these lands. Having dared to
perform with the sort of short-lived swagger that can only come without
an accompanying sense of expectation.

For Derby? It would be lunacy to claim any season of their recent past
would be measurable against such high standards. But the immense
instability of the mid 2000s has dictated and defined the manner in
which the club has struggled since. From 2003-2008, they iterated
between both unexpected successes and failures. But in 2004, built atop
an improbably successful set of free transfers from across the breadth
of Europe, Derby enjoyed an exhilarating playoff finishing season that
faded as swiftly as it had arrived.

The crowning moment of the season? The 3-0 home win against Nottingham
Forest that brought Joe Kinnear's tenure to an ignominious end. The game
lives longer in the memory as an exhibition of the complete team that
Burley had accidentally built. The best illustration being in the fourth
minute. With Derby pulling Forest apart from right to left, Tommy Smith
had the glory of rolling the ball into the corner.

There are many better team goals, but *this* goal was a love letter to
freedom of movement: on football pitches, and in labour markets;
designed entirely by new teammates, and dedicated to their shared
understanding. Exactly the sort of freedom that will no longer be
permitted in 2021, in post-Brexit Britain. At least for club's playing
outside of the UK footballing elite.

## New beginnings

In 2003, the club had been bought for £3 by a company [ominously known
as
ABC](https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/jul/22/david-conn-derby-county),
and lead by three men that would later be come to known as the three
amigos. One of these *amigos* -- Murdo Mackay, a former football agent
with a habit of [leading companies into
insolvency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murdo_Mackay#Career) -- had
been instated as Director of Football, having had an unspecified role in
the transaction itself. On the pitch, former Ipswich Town manager George
Burley had kept Derby up against all the odds at the end of the previous
season. The club had survived thanks to a late season turnaround, the
collective being inspired by the divine intervention of signing Leon
Osman on loan from Everton.

None of this could prevent the image of a club being in free-fall.
Managers had come and gone. Debt was still being paid to players from
the Premiership era, though the team was almost unrecognisable now. By
all accounts, especially those of a financial nature, there was no money
available to bring in anyone to reinforce the team on the pitch. One
that now had a very obvious Osman-shaped hole in midfield. Relegation to
the newly named Coca-Cola League One was the expectation.

With no money to spend, and a fear of re-entering a loan market of which
there had been only a few successes, a little creativity was needed to
find the essential reinforcements. The soon-to-be-disgraced Murdo
Mackay's connections as a football agent would establish the city of
Derby as a footballing destination for an acutely bizarre set of
arrivals. Those that arrived looked suspiciously like an austerity
tribute act for the late 90's Derby County.

The most notable to join in the summer were the perennial Championship
bench-warmer Tommy Smith, former Denmark international winger Morten
Bisgaard from FC Copenhagen, Basque playmaker Iñigo Idiakez from Rayo
Vallecano, and Grzegorz Rasiak from Dyskobolia Grodzisk in Poland. These
had followed the free transfers of Paul Peschisolido and Marco Reich
earlier in the year. Both made telling contributions in helping the club
to avoid relegation in the spring.

## Nottingham Forest

Derby hosted Nottingham Forest in December after an indifferent start to
the season that had seen them lose as many as they had won. Performing
similarly at home and away. Most of their problems a natural
consequence of how many goals that were being conceded. Fortunately,
the new arrivals had combined to provide a much improved propensity of
scoring that made up for their defensive weaknesses.

Burley had adopted an attacking 4-2-3-1 formation with little defensive
shield. Smith, Rasiak, Reich and academy product Marcus Tudgay had each
scored 5 goals or more. In midfield Idiakez and Bisgaard offered a level
of experience, composure, technique, and fluidity that had not been seen
in years. The ageing figures of Peschisolido and captain Ian Taylor
continued to offer goal threats of their own. This was one of those rare
teams that was built to score, with no real intention of defending.
This was a budget Atalanta, lacking the carefully coached
out-of-possession pressing game that makes such playing styles actually
successful.

Forest arrived at Pride Park under significantly worse circumstances.
Joe Kinnear leading them into a relegation battle after finishing
comfortably in mid-table the season before. For some reason, fans of
both teams had jumped on his comments that the upcoming game was "just
any other game", due to the *significance* of the East Midlands rivalry.
Nowadays, such comments are common-place, presumably as a result of
manager's attempting to pre-dampen the negative connotations of a
defeat. But the comment has since come to define the canon of Kinnear's
Forest career. His attempt to distract from the importance of the game
probably did him no favours, especially when he came to resign following
the defeat.

Of course, it is worth remembering that this was an iteration of
Nottingham Forest that was in terminal decline. A team that would go on
to spend three years in League One before finally resurrecting itself
back into the Championship. There were some notable individual players
in the squad: Andy Reid, Michael Dawson, Wes Morgan, Kris Commons,
Marlon King; but without any obvious team dynamic.

## The goal

Part of the splendour of this opening goal is that none of the
participating players had played for Derby 9 months previously. But it's
beauty was completed by its contradictions. In the way that it captured
perfect snapshots of the playing styles of each singular part involved,
within a classic team goal. A counter attack, composed of a series of
short passes.

The move starts deep in the Derby half close to the touchline. Jeff
Kenna, also signed in March 2004, a player who I remember only for his
dedication to committed play, wins the ball. A right back of the purest
form, "*right back* at the end of the pitch".

The ball breaks, to Bisgaard. For some reason, he's left surrounded by
five Forest players that have decided to dangerously press the ball high
up to a wide area of the pitch. His only foil is the presence of the
central striker Rasiak who has come very deep. Bisgaard was never known
for pace, rather guile and quick-thinking. A one-two with Rasiak -- who,
as he would do so often this year, holds off the challenge and flicks
the ball on -- and Bisgaard is away, pace not a problem. All five
opposition players are left in his wake, on a different two-dimensional
plane.

One of the angles of the build-up has Bisgaard head on, running towards
the camera. From the moment he first receives the ball, he's never
looking at his feet. He glides away from midfield and defence, but he's
always looking up. Who are the options? Who's in space? An utterly
selfless midfielder, who I remember best crumbling to his knees, punching
the air, celebrating Arturo Lupoli's last minute winner against Ipswich
Town. Alone on the pitch, two years later.

Bisgaard's dragged two defenders over to cover, so he's looking at space
towards the other side of the pitch. Rather than continuing into the
box, he pulls the ball back early to the centre of the pitch, 30 yards
from goal. This space, this year, is defined by one player. Golden hair
flowing onto the shoulders of Iñigo Idiakez as he receives the ball. The
central pivot around which this team orbits. Easily the most creative
midfielder that I've ever seen in my time watching matches at Pride
Park.

Idiakez wants to score, as he would do many times this season. He's
close to the box, this is perfect range. He looks at goal. But, he
knows. He knows where everyone is in the pitch, and he knows that he's
employing the only defender, Andy Impey, left in Forest's backline. To
Idiakez's left? Hectares of space. The sort of space begging for the
classic inside forward. He rolls the ball into the space and the box,
without waiting even to glance.

Inside forwards? In 2004?! Tommy Smith didn't even have to break his
stride. His career had not taken off as a central striker. Nevertheless,
Burley's decision to play him on the wing, especially on the left, had
raised eyebrows. This was the move that would start his career again,
Premiership moves and a career that saw him continue as a regular
goalscorer from wide areas for the best part of the next decade. From
right-to-left the ball had gone, and from left-to-right Smith passed the
ball back into the opposite corner.

![Tommy Smith scoring past Paul Gerrard](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/tommy-smith/goal.jpeg)

The destruction was complete. It was a move that ended the game as a
contest. Derby had the nerve to miss a penalty, before Rasiak would
memorably pile the misery onto Forest with two instinctive goals in the
second half.

## Distant memories

In my first year as a season ticket-holder, this was the first time that
I had seen Derby play Forest live. Both the year and the game would set
unfair expectations for what I would go on to see afterwards. Only the
next year, Derby would be back to simply avoiding relegation after
having lost Rasiak and other key players.

However, during the rest of 2004-2005, Derby continued to grow and
unexpectedly finish in 4th place, ahead of eventual playoff winners West
Ham. Derby's playoffs would end in the semi-final, losing 2-0 against a
very typical Billy Davies team, and a very typical Preston North End.
There was some injustice in the injuries to the monumental Idiakez and
Rasiak that would effectively end Derby's chances, before they even
began. The real injustice being that perhaps this team would never be
remembered in the way that it deserved to be.

Returning to times like this demands nostalgia, of which there is no
shortage given the precarious position of the club in 2021. Only today,
we sat down to watch Derby labour to a 1-0 defeat against relegation
rivals Rotherham United. Somehow, the permanent appointment of Wayne
Rooney has generated a sense of optimism. In reality, the club
desperately needs severe introspection. The sort of introspection that
is demanded when a club is unable even to pay its own players.

<br>
<iframe width="100%" height="500" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Z-XjOBz4vKc?start=41" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
