---
title: "Derby County: The Beginning of the End?"
date: 2020-11-05 
image: "images/post/post-1.jpg"
author: "Alex Davidson" 
description: "An introduction to Our Baseball Ground"
categories: ["article", "theme"]
tags: ["intro"] 
podcastID: "" 
podcastPath: "intro" 
podcastTitle: "The Beginning of the End"
draft: false
---

This week rumours have continued to circulate that a takeover of Derby
County from a senior member of the Abu Dhabi royal family is imminent.
Against the backdrop of poor quality football being played in empty
Championship stadiums, polls have suggested that the news has largely
been taken [with
optimism](https://dcfcfans.uk/topic/35944-poll-mel-selling-derby-county-fc/).
Part of this may be a decline in the popularity for the way that the
current owner Mel Morris is running the club, but the promise of riches
that may propel the club to better things is also likely to be a
dominant factor.

The takeover may mean many things, or it may mean nothing at all.
Football clubs change ownership all the time. They get relegated, they
get promoted. Or, in Derby's case, they don't. But to me this takeover
is symbolic of a shift to an environment where there is little future
for the club. At least to younger generations of fans, the club is
either known as the worst team in Premier League history, or a stepping
stone for ex-players to make it back to the their spiritual homes way
ahead of schedule (and yes I'm including Rooney here because, as far as
I'm concerned, he's an *ex-player*). Or, we are known as the club that
pioneered exploiting accounting loopholes in order to effectively break
the rules around Financial Fair Play.

The end result is ultimately animosity. Derby County's current
incarnation does not have a lot of friend's beyond the city limits.
Critically, I believe that this imminent takeover will only solidify the
negative external impression of the club. Moreover, it is debatable
whether it will bring any positive change in terms of on-pitch success.
In coordination, these two things are in danger of establishing Derby as
a club with no future. Neither here, nor there. Championship
make-weights. Probably too good to go down, probably too bad to go up.
All of this comes with a painful and insignificant modern history. A
history that has started to eclipse the club's former position, as a
valued member of the top echelons of English football.

Ultimately, this is why we wanted to write and talk about what we have
experienced. We wanted to examine what we've been doing all of these
years, pouring time into a club that appears to be going nowhere. We're
not claiming to be correct about any of this. Maybe Derby County will
come to be respected at the top-level once again, directly from the
events taking place right now. Maybe the club will be respected as a
model of success to be admired, just like clubs such as Wolves,
Leicester, and Sheffield United, that are arguably of equal historical
standing. But, at least to us -- my wife and I, this seems unlikely.

## The Beginnings

I was born in Derby in 1992, but spent a lot of the 90s (that I can
remember) following the exploits of Michael Owen and, naturally,
Liverpool. As a Derby County fan, born to be sick of the sight of
Liverpool following their dominance in the 70s and 80s, my Dad worked
hard to drip-feed the local club into my conscious. In the early 2000s,
I attended a few games at Pride Park each year. I don't remember exactly
but I probably saw less than 5 games live before those Premier League
years ended. I may have seen Mart Poom play, but never witnessed the
cultural riches of the late 90s.

As Derby's fortunes continued to slide in the second tier, we started to
attend more games. My first fully-formed memories of Derby County came
in 2004, witnessing some crucial games in the second half of the season
where Leon Osman helped inspire the club to safety after a torrid season
that looked likely to end up in a relegation to the third tier. The next
year, the 04-05 season, my Dad and I had a season ticket for the first
time. This association continued uninterrupted for 15 years. Even after
I moved away from the city for university, and even I moved around the
UK to Leeds and London for work. Most weeks, returning to Derby to my
seat next to my Dad in the East stand. I met my future wife (AH-D) for
the first time at an away match at Carrow Road in 2008. Over the
following years, we've been to more games together than I can really
remember. It's safe to say our lives became intertwined with the club.

In 2019, my wife and I made a move one step too far: to Lisbon,
Portugal. It turns out there is no easy way of making a Saturday
kick-off when you live an approximate 3 hour flight away from London.
Somewhat fortuitously, a global pandemic has meant that the playing
field has been levelled dramatically, and attending a live game even if
you live in Derby is also currently an impossibility.

## The Football

So, what have we watched? Well, there have been many kinds of failures,
and very few successes. Focusing on the successes for now, they're
isolated. Individual matches, rarely assorted together into a coherent
season. The seasons that did see multiple successes collected together
[usually](http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport2/hi/football/eng_div_1/4537183.stm)
[ended](https://www.bbc.com/sport/football/27452294)
[in](https://www.bbc.com/sport/football/32459763)
[despair](https://www.bbc.com/sport/football/44026478)
[anyway](https://www.bbc.com/sport/football/48331145). And [when they
didn't end in
despair](http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport2/hi/football/eng_div_1/6689971.stm),
the club was just crowned the [worst team in
history](http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport2/hi/football/teams/d/derby_county/4856682.stm)
the next year instead.

Manager's have come and gone since 2004: precisely different 18 people
have been entrusted with the reins for a competitive match. That's
nearly 41% of all the managers in the entire 136 year history of the
club, in just 17 seasons (and may grow again very soon). Player's have
also come and gone. Many that I don't remember, and some that I wish
that I didn't.

Throughout all of this change, the team has had many so-called
philosophies. From the somewhat pioneering 4-3-3 of the George Burley
era, to the resilient win-at-all-costs approach of Billy Davies, to the
buy players without any planned system take of Paul Jewell, to the
austerity years spent scouring the Scottish transfer market under Nigel
Clough, to the free-wheeling, high-intensity attacking game under Steve
McClaren, to the expensive stale periods under Paul Clement & Nigel
Pearson, to the Vydra-reliant displays overseen by Gary Rowett, to the
chaotic yet exciting year under Frank Lampard, to the calming scaling
back of the club's ambitions under Philip Cocu.

A club at once criticised for its flaunting of spending power, whilst
only having a net spend of Â£1.4 million in the years between and
including the 16-17 and 19-20 seasons. A club praised for its
integration of numerous youth players, whilst also continuing to sign 34
year old strikers with a goalscoring average of less than 1 goal in
every 6 matches.

As we enter our 17th season of watching and listening to nearly every
game, we still don't know what the identity of the club is.

## The Future

Under a global pandemic, the clubs outside of the Premier League appear
to be suffering on a scale that has not been known previously. The
economic disparity between football's wealthy elite, and the majority
that prop up the rest of the football league continues to widen. Over
the coming years, the impact of not being able to stage matches to live
audiences is likely to be felt far beyond the North West and the
unforgivable demise of historic clubs such as Bury and Macclesfield
Town.

Derby County will potentially face a similar fate if things continue as
they are. A club that famously haemorrhages cash, with very limited
chances in terms of succeeding in their current division. It's a toxic
combination, that is made worse by the EFL's insistence that clubs abide
by FFP regulations that the EFL does nothing to enforce. Or worse,
allows clubs to be [driven into the
ground](https://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/53247333) by crooked
owners, before then [punishing the club's
themselves](https://www.bbc.com/sport/football/53318930) for getting
into the mess. Worse yet, any potential intervention to save the clubs
in the EFL from financial despair appears to be inextricably linked to
the [solidification of the current footballing
elite](https://www.bbc.com/sport/football/54545053).

Watching Derby County games on television further reinforces the stark
gap in quality between the top division and the level that the club
currently operates at. Even if a miraculous promotion were to occur, it
is not clear how much improvement would have to be made to avoid a
similar fate to the 07/08 season. More likely is that the club will
continue to integrate young players and narrowly avoid relegation this
year. But, finding springboards for rapid improvement from these
positions is always unlikely. Even more so without the financial backing
to enact such changes.

So, *this* brings us to the void. A void where a takeover by a
mysterious and unknown consortium of individuals with links to the Abu
Dhabi royal family starts to make more sense. The only possible
solution, for a club going backwards. A club that's arguably been going
backwards for *at least* 6 years, but probably closer to 16 with small
interludes of positive progress in between.

## Our Baseball Ground

Our Baseball Ground has never been the Baseball Ground itself, no matter
how much older fans yearn for those days. We've been told time and time
again that we should yearn for those days ourselves. But we never saw
the *good* times, so we've had to make the good times from whatever we
could during this fallow era.

Our Baseball Ground has been 16 seasons (and counting) of second-tier
football, split by the one ill-fated year in the top division of English
football. Our Baseball Ground saw the club celebrate buying their
stadium back from the ownership of a mysterious Panamanian Corportation
[nearly 15 years
ago](http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport2/hi/football/4954484.stm), only to then
celebrate selling it to a businessman who now plans to sell the club to
an opaque and unknown consortium based in the UAE. Our Baseball Ground
saw the club sack its club captain for an off-field incident that was
executed by two players that continued to play for the club. Our
Baseball Ground has seen the club steadily decline under the stewardship
of a local businessman. A man that has painstakingly enabled the
dismantling of the best Derby County squad over the past two decades,
and then hid all of his failings behind the fact that he was a Derby
*"fan"*. A man that continues to *speak* to supporters only via his
regular appearances with his mates on talk-show radio.

Against this backdrop, we wanted to start a discussion around the recent
history that we *do* know. We wanted to talk about what elements of this
period have been crucial in determining the clubs trajectory to the
position that it currently inhabits in the present day. We aim to
publish an article every two weeks on a key topic: a match, a moment, a
player, a person, or an object associated with the club. Alongside the
article, we will record a podcast that will discuss the topic in more
detail from our perspectives. In the end, we hope to create a tapestry
of disparate elements that help inform the whole situation that the club
currently finds itself in. Over the course of this endeavour, if you
would be interested in writing a guest article, or appearing as a guest
on a podcast, please [get in
touch](https://ourbaseballground.com/contact/)!

This is the only club we know, and so this is the only club that we can
talk about.
