---
title: "Derby County 4-4 Ipswich Town"
date: 2020-11-22 
image: "images/post/ipswich.png"
author: "Alex Davidson" 
description: "Derby County 4-4 Ipswich Town"
categories: ["article", "match"]
tags: ["key match", "mcclaren"] 
podcastPath: ""
draft: false
---

Today Steve McClaren was confirmed as the new technical director of
Derby County. His association with the club goes all the way back to
1985: this will be his fifth time arriving at Derby in some official
capacity. The incoming takeover rumbles on in the background amidst
silence from the outgoing administration. Derby County sit bottom of the
championship; manager-less and goal-less.

It seems only fitting that in this article we will return to the moment
that Steve McClaren was appointed Head Coach of Derby County for the
first time, in September 2013. This first spell at the club brought a
sustained period of improved performance and results that had not been
seen at the club many years prior. An improvement on the George Burley
years by means of establishing a more consistent approach to winning
football matches. A step above the Billy Davies era (if ultimately less
successful) by routinely outplaying the opposition.

In truth, his managerial reign went on to define a philosophy and a
set of players whose shadows the club has never truly escaped from.
A period of such success (relative to previous years) on relatively
little resources should have been capitalised on. Instead the weight of
expectation that these years generated became the albatross around the
club's neck. Derby were probably the best team in the championship by
some way for a 16 month period. Unfortunately that 16 month period
bridged two separate seasons, neither of which ended in promotion. The
club has never really recovered.

There are many things that can be said about this period but, in the
interest of keeping the word count down, we will focus on the match that
started it all. A game watched by 21000 people on a cold night in
October against Ipswich Town, managed by Mick McCarthy. Where the core
principles and ideas of the 4-3-3 formation that would become the
baseline by which the future incarnations of the club's tactical setup
would be judged against. Bringing together a group of players that Derby
would never really move on from.

## The sacking of Nigel Clough

![Table after 9 games](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/ipswich/table09.png)

Nigel Clough and the years he spent as the manager of Derby County
probably deserve their own dedicated discussions, but his ending came as
something of a surprise. After 9 games, in a very typical Nigel Clough
start to the season, Derby lay 14th on 11 points. It was a shock to see
Clough shown the door after the best of four years of very similar
showings, but the lack of improvement coupled with a routine defeat away
at Forest seemed to indicate that progress was going to be limited in
the upcoming season as well.

Clough's tenure was marked by a lack of any real philosophy. Formations
came and went. Players arrived for little expenditure, and left for
little income. At the end of the previous season, Chris Martin and Craig
Forsyth arrived on loan from clubs in very similar positions; unfancied
even at the level that Derby were competing. Overall, the hope appeared
to be that Derby would eventually strike lucky on a combination of cheap
players and tactical tweaks. In a division as competitive as the
championship, such occurrences are rare, and usually [end up in disaster
anyway](http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport2/hi/football/eng_prem/7309363.stm). 

In the last season, Derby had finished 10th. With 7 games to play there
was a marginal hope that they may make the playoffs but a poor run of
results saw Derby fall a significant number of points off. In the close
season, they had decided to sign Chris Martin and Craig Forsyth
permanently, whilst also striking a very Nigel Clough deal to sign the
Scottish forward Johnny Russell from Dundee United. Other deals included
signing long-term transfer target John Eustace, and the goalkeeper Lee
Grant (both for the second time).

The team struggled at home, beaten comprehensively by the eventual top
two Leicester and Burnley, and yet to win at Pride Park by the time
Ipswich arrived. Away from home was a different story, where they had
three wins (including three and five goals at Yeovil and Millwall,
respectively) and were unbeaten until they lost to Forest at the end of
September. The ever energetic midfielder Craig Bryson had demonstrated
his rising goal threat with a hattrick in the Millwall game. A troubling
start no doubt, but not without reasons for some optimism.

Steve McClaren was announced as Head Coach the day before the Ipswich
game, arriving with Paul Simpson as assistant, "it's great to be back
here" he said in his first interview. Little did he know... Derby also
announced the signing of Zak Whitbread on loan from Leicester (a
strangely Nigel Clough signing itself) to further push the notion that
the title "Head Coach" was not a misnomer.

## A disastrous start

The game itself was watched by a very lowly 21000 people. (Remember the
days where such crowds were small!). Sitting in the ground with my Dad,
I was full of optimism for a new start that was seemingly not matched by
the rest of the city. The Nigel Clough era never really worked for me,
and so (even) Steve McClaren was a breath of fresh air. But for this
game, it was Darren Wassall in charge (the head of the youth team).
McClaren was in the stadium but hadn't signed the contract in time to
have the honour of leading the team out yet.

The team set up looks a bit laughable now with everything that has come
and gone. A midfield two of Bryson and Hughes was always going to be far
too open. Conor Sammon and Ben Davies should never have been on the
pitch in the first place. Chris Martin in a front two? Please.

![Starting lineup](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/ipswich/start.png)

But it was only the currency of set pieces that the opening half of the
game would accept as legal tender. Ipswich took a 2-0 lead from two
terribly defended corners. Future mid-priced FPL shout Aaron Cresswell
delivering with two assists.

Now, Derby scored from their own corner. Ben Davies supplying the corner
and Zak Whitbread heading in to kickstart Derby's fightback. But the
resurgence was immediately dampened, Cresswell now firing his own shot
straight through Lee Grant. He then retrieved his third assist with
*another* corner, headed in for a second time by Daryl Murphy.

## A comeback

In the stadium, it was the same as usual. Standing around waiting for
the team to come out and finish off what they had started. In the
dressing room, McClaren and Simpson had decided that the first half
performance was beyond the pale. Demanding a switch to a 4-3-3 that
would allow the midfield of Hughes and Bryson more license to attack
with a defensive shield in behind, and a removal of the systematically
poor Ben Davies for some more mobility on the wing. On came John Eustace
for Conor Sammon and Mason Bennett for Ben Davies. On the face of it,
potentially negative changes, but the foresight to release the midfield
was to change the game. A rousing team talk was reportedly given by Paul
Simpson and away they went.

![Lineup after halftime](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/ipswich/ht.png)

On the pitch, Derby started the second half like a team that were
grappling with their last chance to save a season that was fast
unravelling into mediocrity. There were midfield runners: Craig Bryson
arriving into the box to reduce the deficit after only two minutes. The
wide players were feeding off the cultured three-course meals served up
by Chris Martin: Jamie Ward bringing Derby closer to a hugely improbable
(but completely necessary) comeback. A team with added the intensity to
keep attacking from multiple angles even late into the game. Craig
Bryson a man desperate to assert his credentials for the player of the
season award at this early stage completed the comeback as Derby ground
Ipswich into a pulp.

I always found it fairly strange that Craig Bryson celebrated the final
goal rather than sprinting the ball back to the centre circle, such was
the level of dominance. It seemed inevitable that the team would win
from the very first minute of the half, so it was a minor disappointment
to only manage to overcome the three goal deficit for the draw.

## A catalyst

I left Pride Park that night thinking that something dramatic had
changed, but not being quite able to put my finger on it. The talk the
next day was of the immediate reaction that the manager had had in his
half-time team talk. It was obvious that the 4-3-3 formation that
finished the game would continue into the next, with the substitutes
Eustace and Bennett probably likely to start again at the weekend.

![Table after 23 games](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/ipswich/table23.png)

Up next was Leeds at home, and what came was a 3-1 win. Ten wins, two
draws, and one loss from the next thirteen matches. Rising to third
place after a win in the last game of 2013. The second half of the
season would be bumpier, but they would still finish the season an
improbably 3rd. Losing only to Queens Park Rangers in one of the biggest
injustices a play-off final has seen.

While small adjustments were made to the personnel over that season, the
formation and style of play stuck. In fact, it was only when Gary Rowett
succeeded McClaren in 2017 that the formation was really abandoned. When
McClaren was sacked at the end of the next season, it was noted that
Derby didn't have a plan B when things got tough. But the real issue
seemed to be that they had lost the personnel to play the required
roles.

## What remains?

The only player left from the Tuesday night against Ipswich is the Craig
Forsyth, but it would be surprising if he remained a Derby player beyond
this season. Beyond the long-serving left back, it's difficult to see
what remains from the night that kicked the club into its most
positive period of football since the late 90s.

Now, sitting bottom of the championship, led by an interim management
team centred around Wayne Rooney. It's easy to wonder how it all went so
wrong.
