---
title: "January 2008"
date: 2021-01-03 
image: "images/post/january-2008.jpeg"
author: "Alex Davidson" 
description: "A look into the transfer window of 2008, as Derby looked
to save their first season back in the Premiership since 2002."
categories: ["article", "match"]
tags: ["key moment", "jewell era"] 
podcastPath: ""
draft: false
---

In England, the 2021 January transfer window dawns amidst rafts of
cancellations that are natural consequences of attempting to play
through the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. There is a growing sense that
the football season will be temporarily neutralised in order to prevent
rising virus transmission figures -- as it was in 2020.

For Derby County, this period of the year has always been an expensive
and fallow field when it comes to harvesting additional quality. Derby's
status in 2021 is not exactly clear-cut; the upcoming window may be
important in avoiding starting next season in the third tier of English
football for the first time since 1986.

Nevertheless, in honour of the significance of the month of January in
the football calendar, we will be digging through the rubble of the
fateful -- and uniquely destructive -- winter window of the 2007-2008
season. As the world crumbled in the hands of decaying financial
institutions, Derby were desperately, and misguidedly, trying to cling
onto their recently acquired Premier League status. Sadly enough, it is
plausible that the club (and the world) has never really recovered from
the disastrous choices that were made.

## 7 points from 20 matches

We would need much more time and Internet page real estate to comb over
the details of what actually went wrong in the full season. But we join
Derby County on 01 January, with the club sitting on 7 points from 20
played, and 9 points adrift of safety. If the disparity in points
totals didn't illustrate the chasm in quality between Derby and their
rivals, perhaps the -36 goal difference, compared with the next worst
-19, would.

![Table at the start of January](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/january-2008/pl-table.png)

Derby had sacked Billy Davies and replaced him with the apparently
"highly rated" ([according to Wikipedia,
anyway](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2007%E2%80%9308_Derby_County_F.C._season#Review))
Paul Jewell, whose last job had seen him keep Wigan up against the odds
before promptly resigning. The appointment was hinged on the portrayal
of Jewell as some anti-relegation mastermind, having also kept Bradford
City from relegation on the last game of 2000.

Jewell spent the early games of his reign [openly disparaging
the team in the press](https://youtu.be/hkW0SucmgVM?t=254), an odd
tactic for a side so clearly abandoned by any notion of confidence. He
would also repeatedly pledge to bring in new players in January that
would hopefully turn the club's fortunes around.

## Over-tried and untested

While performances in the early parts of Jewell's reign were wrongly
believed to have improved, the team developed a habit of losing games in
the very last stages of games. In December, Sunderland and Liverpool
would beat Derby with goals in stoppage time, and the trend continued at
Bolton away on January 2nd.

<iframe width="100%" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/3WZccGAuaUg" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<br><br>

With a 10 day gap before their next league game, the transfers started
rolling in and out. Either side of a hopeless draw against Sheffield
Wednesday in the FA Cup, Derby brought in three experienced (read:
ageing) players in Robbie Savage, Danny Mills (who had spent the first
half of the season in the Championship) and Laurent Robert (whose last
positive impressions were left back in 2005). These signings contrasted
with the untried duo of Emanuel Villa and Hossam Ghaly.

The variety of positions covered by the players that came in indicates
that Jewell thought that the squad needed improving all over the pitch,
although he was willing to let Steve Howard (last season's top scorer)
and Matt Oakley (the captain) go. At the start of the season, Oakley and
Howard were seen as two of the most critical parts of any success that
Derby may enjoy. Eminently, both had become too intertwined with the
club's failure, and were deemed dispensable.

Looking marginally closer at the details, there seemed to be very little
evidence that Jewell had any idea what he was looking for. From a
financial aspect, the immediate outlay for the players was not
significantly higher than the money received from outgoings. The real
expense came in the form of a rapidly expanding wage bill, fattened by
the signing of numerous high-profile players. Bringing such a large
contingent who were very obviously finished was quite obviously
ludicrous, at least for a team that had little hope of staying up.

At the same time, how Jewell decided that replacing Steve Howard with
Tito Villa, a forward who until then had no notable career outside of
Mexico, was mystifying. It was a desperately nostalgic transfer, dreamt
up by a man that had made a habit of utilising obscure foreign markets
in his time at Wigan.

## The more things change, the more they stay the same

With this in mind, it was no real surprise that Derby continued to
struggle. Barely edging past Sheffield Wednesday on penalties in the FA
cup replay, whilst continuing to lose in the Premier League, including
against relegation rivals Wigan at home.

<iframe width="100%" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/hkW0SucmgVM" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<br><br>

Uncharacteristically, the team battled to a draw on January 30th, before
they pulled all available desperation triggers again on
deadline day. This time, they signed Roy Carroll and Alan Stubbs to
double-down on adding more rotting careers to the pile, alongside the
outright bizarre arrival of Australian journeyman Mile Sterjovski. This
trio may now take comfort from the indisputable fact that the damage had
already been long done by the time that they arrived.

Even allowing for the anomalousness of Villa and Ghaly, what we can
derive from the window as a whole is that the manager thought that
increasing age and experience in the squad was of prime importance in
improving results. The average age of those arriving was 30.6.

The drawing of such a conclusion was odd and unfounded. Derby had
already a very experienced core of players: Darren Moore, Michael
Johnson, Oakley, Andy Todd, Eddie Lewis, Howard, and Gary Teale; to name
but a few. More likely, this was symptomatic of the approaches of
substandard managers like Jewell and his contemporaries: always
returning to the same old names for mutual elongation of flagging
careers.

To make matters more complicated, Derby would see a change of ownership
at the end of the month, being transferred themselves into the [hands of
a US-based
consortium](https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/feb/05/derbyleftinthedarkoverwh),
ominously known as General Sports and Entertainment (GSE). The new
owners would take over from the locally-sourced board of directors that
had presided over the promotion last season, but it was not clear
whether they already had been overseeing the spending early in the
window.

On top of all of this, this was the start of 2008 and the middle of a
global financial crisis, caused primarily by severe investor
over-confidence in unregulated markets. At the very least, Paul Jewell's
spending spree on a set of both provably subprime and completely
untested players, with very little apparent oversight, was offered
almost perfectly as football's unironic reflection of the times.

## The worst team in history

As we know, Derby would accrue a further three points over the rest of
the season. When evaluating how much the January recruitment drive
failed, the nadir that we respect **has** to be the [6-0 home defeat by
Aston Villa](https://www.premierleague.com/history/videos?se=16&cl=-1).
But the real impact of the January 2008 transfer window was to be felt
for years after the initial disaster that took place. Not until Nigel
Clough was long gone, did Derby dare to meaningfully engage with this
transfer window again. More importantly, the club was left saddled with
a series of debts and obligations -- alongside a crippling lack of
confidence -- that would see them waltz into middling obscurity in the
second tier.

Of the players that signed, Danny Mills would make only 3 appearances
before being forced to retire with injury. Likewise, Alan Stubbs would
make it to 8 appearances before suffering a similar fate. Laurent Robert
would make 4 appearances and be released at the end of the season to set
sail for Canada. Hossam Ghaly, who had looked somewhat out-of-place in a
side so devoid of natural talent, would return to Tottenham: a career in
England would never materialise for him. Mile Sterjovski, Roy Carroll
and Villa would leave at the end of the following season after Nigel
Clough deemed them ill-equipped to perform at Championship level. This
left Robbie Savage as the only player that continued until the end of
his contract in 2011.

Briefly on the topic of Robbie Savage, it's difficult to think of an
incoming transfer that had more of a negative an impact on the club.
Arriving from Blackburn Rovers, he was probably the highest profile
signing, and his task was to instil order and discipline in a side that
was unable to organise itself. Strangely, Savage had fashioned his
latter days into merely being an on-pitch *jester*, and so he seemed
quite clearly ill-positioned to fulfil such a role. Consequently, while
there was the significant financial outlay for a player coming to the
end of his career, more costly was his continued presence throughout his
3 and a half years at the club. 

By the time Derby were relegated, Savage's playing ability had declined
sharply to barely operating at a below-average Championship club, and
his final roles were essentially limited to antagonising the opposition
with both classic needling, and
[scarf-waving](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TGUAxudQRJI). Ultimately,
his frustrating ability to build rapport with the fans of the clubs
that he played for allowed him to prolong a playing career that should
really have ended in 2008.

In general, it's safe to say that the pressing concern was that the club
lacked any real quality in any position. While rectifying this to the
extent of avoiding relegation was no doubt impossible, a well-scripted
January 2008 could have gone a long way to ensuring that Derby would
spend January 2010 back in the Premier League. Clubs like West Brom
(formerly Sunderland and Newcastle to a lesser extent) are maligned for
their _"bounciness"_ when it comes to their league status. But in
reality, it's testament to their abilities to build squads that are that
can consistently churn out results in the Championship and ultimately
keep returning to the top tier. The mid-season transfer window was a
chance for Derby to rectify the mistakes of the first half of the
season, with the focus on establishing the club as a long-term Premier
League fixture again. Instead, it was missed by such a wide margin that
it set back the club's progress for years, the consequence being the
austerity imposed during the Nigel Clough/GSE era.

As the case may be for Derby, it may be that this was all unavoidable
after all. Viewed in the wider context of Derby's trajectory since the
heady days overseen by Jim Smith in the late 90s, the fact that Derby
started the 2007-08 season in the Premier League was merely an
aberration within a systemic period of decline. Attempting to cling onto
their status as a Premier League club in January 2008 by exercising
significant financial resources, rather than accepting their certain
fate, was a last ditch attempt to maintain the pride of the new
management and ownership structures. Unfortunately those choices
undoubtedly left the club in a worse state than they had been in 2006,
before they were promoted.
