---
title: "Turning points: Chris Martin vs Burnley, 2014"
date: 2021-04-10
image: "images/post/martin-burnley.jpg"
author: "Alex Davidson" 
description: "Returning to the moment that changed everything"
categories: ["article", "goal"]
tags: ["key moment", "mcclaren era"]
podcastPath: ""
draft: false
---

This podcast began back in November 2020, when the takeover of Derby
County by a consortium linked with the United Arab Emirates looked
imminent, and the authors had not yet decided whether to press ahead
with an impending flat purchase. Ignoring the takeover, Derby's season
threatened to be unravelling into a terminal relegation battle, while we
set out to battle with a scandal-ridden Portuguese bank for our right to
be leant the requisite *dinheiro* that makes the purchase of property
viable. In essence, neither us nor the club could afford to make any
sort of step forward, without significant investment from dubious
sources. 


In April 2021, this article is the first to be written for the last
two/three months. I've found a small amount of space to perch a computer
amongst the accumulating wreckage of a not-so-recent move. For Derby
County? They are now on the cusp of finally extricating themselves from
a torturous relegation-battle, with a reasonable portion of the season
still to be played. Nevertheless, in the long-term, the situation
appears bleak. After months of making claims to the contrary, Mel Morris
and the rest of the executive-level operation have failed to coerce the
buying party into keeping their end of the deal.

The longest in a particular lengthy line of public failures as Derby
chairman for Mel Morris has spectacularly thrown the financial future of
the club into
[disarray](https://www.theguardian.com/football/2021/feb/25/derby-takeover-silence-and-mounting-debts-how-did-it-come-to-this).
A history of perplexing managerial hirings and sackings, coupled with
numerous failed attempts to recover lost pride and money from previous
employees, have never really stuck to a man that takes immense pride in
publicly engorging the myth of his business acumen. However, with
nothing to show from a season that has been left in tatters, the teflon
veneer may finally be wearing off. 

Morris's legacy will probably be defined by who he passes the club onto,
rather than anything he managed in his own time. At the time of writing,
a young man with plausible links to the far-right in Spain and financed
by a set of essentially unknown backers seems to be the heir apparent.
So it seems like everything is finally heading in the right direction,
no?

## So, *where* did it all go wrong?

The *raison d'être* of this body of work has always been to scrutinise
the points along a curve charting the systemic decline of Derby County.
But in the face of the genuine uncertainty that surrounds the club, it
seems pertinent to define, for certain, where the global maxima of this
journey lies in real footballing terms. The minutiae of events that
occur external to the football that is played can be debated by people
for time eternal. But which of the moments on the many football pitches
that Derby have inhabited best captures the turning of the tide? Where
would *you* return to, if you were given the chance to try it all again?
To turn Derby County into a regular bottom-half of the Premiership team?
(Of course, there has to be some sense of realism).

For me, probably unsurprisingly, we must return to 2014. Amidst the wild
and ceaseless ascent of Steve McClaren's first year in charge. But, it
would be pointless to continue arguing over whether starting Craig
Bryson in the playoff final would have made all the difference —
especially after Will Hughes's wonderful performance in the previous
match. Likewise, there are too many variables to manipulate in adjusting
for the *what-ifs* around the solitary poor patch in March 2014, and
whether Clough had been sacked too late.

So, given the chance, I would return to the 1st of March 2014, to the
2-0 defeat away at Burnley. A defeat that saw Burnley go 5 points clear
of Derby in second place. A game in which Chris Martin was shown a
second yellow card in the first half for a suspected dive, in what I
still hold closely as one of the great miscarriages of justices carried
forth by a referee.

![Chris Martin being sent
off](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/martin-burnley/red-card.jpg)

It is not that I think that there was an especially glaring error in
Robert Madley's judgement. Instead it embodies the most obvious
fluctuation of the chaotic theory that underlies all of Derby's recent
problems. I stood in the away end at Turf Moor in 2014, and watched a
red card flutter in the cold air of a receding North West winter. In
2021, I find myself in Lisboa, Portugal during an endless global
pandemic, still worrying about Derby County; wondering how it may be
possible that they can arrest their slow and desperate slide towards the
lower reaches of English football.

## The stage

Derby had started January poorly, with two defeats that had seen them
slip out of the top two. Fortunately, a run of five wins and two draws
had seen them keep within two points of Burnley in second place, whilst
Leicester had slowly pulled out of reach. Burnley themselves had been on
an equally successful run, and so this match was already being billed as
a crucial point for both sides in asserting which way the promotion
battle may go.

We arrived in Burnley on a Saturday afternoon a couple of hours before
the game after driving directly west from our home in Leeds. We had a
walk around looking for something to eat for lunch. Eventually we
settled on the kind of unassuming takeaway that you would usually settle
on at 2am in the centre of a city, picking up a veggie burger for myself
and a dubious kebab for the other Alex — we had not yet made the
transformation into herbivorous animals. Anyway, we shivered in the cold
for a few minutes after eating, before accepting that we should just go
and sit in the stadium and wait for something to happen. 

Turf Moor is an old, unwelcoming type of stadium; Burnley, under Sean
Dyche, are an old, unwelcoming type of team. The away end behind one of
the goals almost plays spectator to the rest of the ground, as well as
the pitch. The sides of the ground filled with home fans cluster closely
to the action, almost deliberately excluding the visitors from the
events that take place.

A typical Dyche outfit, Burnley's starting 11 had seen little variation
over the season, and it was the sixth game running that they went
unchanged. Derby had long undergone their transformation into the 4-3-3
that became synonmous with McClaren's time in charge, but with a much
more flexible approach to the playing personnel. Perhaps leaving the
so-far impressive Patrick Bamford on the bench alongside Craig Bryson
may have been the biggest problem in this particular game, but it's
impossible to judge these things with any sense of accuracy.

## The game

What we can judge to a better extent is how things played out on the
pitch. Ex-Derby midfielder David Jones had crashed an impressive volley
off the underside of the crossbar for 1-0 long before Derby had decided
to take part in this game. So, after a penalty call involving a felled
Chris Martin had seemingly been ignored, but Jeff Hendrick<sup>1</sup>
still curled a loose ball into the bottom of the net, it seemed like a
gift that Derby had barely deserved. And we celebrated like it too.

Cue the sarcastic cheers of the home fans. A whistle had been blown. The
ball had fallen loose from an altercation between a Burnley defender and
the already-booked Chris Martin. A figure of incomparable importance to
Derby for so long, but this year he was absolute in his play. This was
Total Chris Martin: strength, goals, technique, cleverly won free-kicks.
A lower-league Diego Costa.

Naturally, then, the horror of what was happening slowly rumbled into
view. The referee was pointing back towards the Derby goal, he had
adjudged Martin to have simulated contact (TV replays later showing that
there was clear contact on the Derby forward, [see below](#highlights)).
The second yellow was unleashed and withdrawn, followed by the red.

It was in these seconds, that we realised that everything had been lost.
The goal wouldn't count, it was still 1-0. The penalty that we had
pleaded for seconds earlier? It would not be given. The ball that had
hit the back of the net? Placed into the arms of Tom Heaton. And the
stable fixed point up front around which the dynamics of the entire team
converged had been removed. All that was left, was to accept defeat. The
promotion race had, in all likelihood, been settled.

## The impact

The immediate impact was obvious, Derby would need something close to a
miracle to haul back the momentum from an imperious Burnley team over
the rest of the season. And, in fact, they wouldn't even come close.
Winning two of the seven subsequent matches, Derby had to settle for a
distant third place (albeit with a points total that could easily have
grasped at the top two in a different year).

They would recover with big wins in important matches: the 5-0 against
Forest, the playoff wins over Brighton. The real tragedy being that
nothing they could do from this point would save them from the lottery
of a potential playoff final. Such events are prone to being decided by
the dice throws of random variables, rather than the output of any
coherent function of a team's general ability.

Maybe Derby could have avoided defeat. Maybe they would have gone on to
be promoted. Maybe they would have returned at the first time of asking,
or maybe they would have stayed and battled relegation for a few years.
Maybe they would have won the Premier League like one of the teams
involved in this promotion race... 

Ifs, buts, doubts, and hopes. Derby never did, and the only player left
from that team is Craig Forsyth. Chris Martin left almost a year ago. It
will be a while until someone else has as sustained and effective impact
for the club. Though, ultimately, it still feels like there was so much
more that he and Derby could have achieved.

So, this is where I return to sometimes, when I sit down to the pleasure
of watching Derby close out a turgid win at home to Luton Town. A result
that is essential as much as it is a depressing sign of the times. I
drift away from the present and make the long journey back to Burnley
seven years ago. Imagining physically going to watch a team, playing
enjoyable games of football, winning a healthy proportion of the time.
For so many reasons it's unfathomable.

To conclude everything, you ask me: where did it all go wrong? **Here**.
This was the moment.

<br>

## Highlights

<iframe width="100%" height="500" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/mWoGYUQ2L5E" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<sup>1</sup><small>The [BBC match
report](https://www.bbc.com/sport/football/26300165) claims that it was
Forsyth that struck the shot, but my famously sieve-like memory suggests
otherwise and the video backs my version of events up.</small>