---
title: "Outside-in: A Derby County eleven"
date: 2021-01-31
image: "images/post/outside-in-eleven.jpeg"
author: "Peter Smith" 
description: "Arsenal & Luton fan Peter Smith gives us the rundown on
eleven players that he associates most with Derby County"
categories: ["article", "team"]
tags: ["iconic teams", "guest writer"]
podcastPath: "Episode-6---Outside-in-A-Derby-County-eleven-Part-1-Goalkeeper-and-defence-epsbuq"
podcastPathB: "Episode-7---Outside-in-A-Derby-County-eleven-Part-2-Midfield-and-attack-eqni5o"
draft: false
---

**_This weeks article is written by our podcast guest Peter Smith.
Growing up in London as a fan of Arsenal, Luton Town, and the Sports
Interactive football management series, Peter has encountered Derby
County many times along his up and (mostly) down journey as a football
fan. With this perspective, he gives us the rundown on a 4-4-2 formation
filled with "iconic" Derby County players from the late 90s, all the way
up to the present day._**

First off, I should say that I’m no Derby fan. I don’t mean that as a
swipe at the club but simply that I support another team. Since I was
around six years old, I have supported Arsenal. Although, I have had,
very controversially, dalliances with other teams. Between 2003 and
2005, I attended games at my local ground, Upton Park, as they operated
a “kid for a quid” deal. This was a great opportunity to watch First
Division (now Championship) football cheaply and was ideal for me, whose
parents could not pay for me to go to games at Highbury often at all. I
then, from 2006 to 2009, attended games at Kenilworth Road, Luton Town’s
ground and the occasional away game. I have continued to attend Luton
matches very sporadically (perhaps once a season) since.

Why am I telling you all this? Well, it is to establish my lack of
credentials to talk about Derby County but also give some context for
the ways in which I have encountered the players whom I will discuss. I
must also confess that, like any self-respecting 90s and 00s child, I
have sunk far more hours than are good for me into Championship or
Football Manager and, inevitably, some of my impressions of Derby
players have been coloured by what I have seen on the game. I will try
and avoid this becoming a “listen to this story about my saved game”,
because I have finally learned that no one other than me really gives a
s*** about my games. And quite right too.

I will choose 11 players in (of course) a 4-4-2 formation, as well as a
manager, and also the ground I most associate with Derby. I will try and
provide some context on what this player has done to pierce the
consciousness of a neutral fan, and why they may be notable to non-Derby
fans. Some of the experiences are unique to me, but anyway, here goes.

## Goalkeeper: Stephen Bywater

![Stephen Bywater](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/pete-team/bywater.jpeg)

A surprising choice considering the luminaries who have played in goal
for the club since 1997: Mart Poom, Lee Grant, Lee Camp, Roy Carroll,
and Scott Carson, among others. Is it because I remember him being a
pretty poor stand in for David James at West Ham? Maybe. Is it because
he was the goalkeeper for Derby’s legendary 07-08 Premier League season?
Maybe. Is it because he spelled out the C-word on a Sunday morning TV
show, allegedly looking very pleased with himself as he did so, which
caused the presenter to be suspended for two months and (again
allegedly) have to take time off due to stress? Most definitely. Not a
great goalkeeper and not a great person.

## Left Back: Chris Powell

![Chris Powell](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/pete-team/powell.jpeg)

Although this is a man more closely associated with Charlton Athletic,
Chris Powell was still at Derby when my younger self first became aware
of football in the late 90s and, while he was not there for long, was
almost ever present over two seasons in the top flight. He was always
good for a 7 out of 10 performance and seemed a likeable person to boot.
He never really got talked about for England that much, although he did
get five caps. The last of which came in 2002 which is around the time
Ashley Cole (a more obvious candidate for this team but I don’t
associate him at all with Derby) broke through, and so it is hardly
surprising he didn’t get more.

## Centre Back: Richard Keogh

![Richard Keogh](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/pete-team/keogh.jpeg)

This is a controversial one and should probably be swerved by a
non-Derby fan but he really had to be in this team. Not only was he such
a beloved figure by the Alexes, so much so that his smiling face adorned
my table at their wedding thereby securing his place in this team, but
also the way he was dealt with seemed a bit... off... It is reasonable,
perhaps, for a club to sack someone who can be accused of gross
misconduct when he won’t be able to play for more than a year and we
would expect nothing less of any other business. The fact, however, that
the far more guilty parties in this accident, no doubt because their
injuries were less severe and they were younger, were retained I am sure
sticks in many a Derby fan’s craw (whatever the hell a craw is). 

Furthermore, we are entitled to expect more from our clubs than to be
run like businesses. *\*Climbs on soapbox\** People blithely say to me
that we have to just accept that our clubs do not belong to us but that
is nonsense. The Derby fans are fully entitled to expect their club to
pay to retain a man on a contract nobody forced them to sign and fulfil
their obligations while he recovers from injury. Some may say they were
glad he was got rid of and that’s fine but other fans should be allowed
to believe that the club should assume the financial burden of
supporting its club captain because of some intangible sense of it being
“the right thing to do”. It may also frustrate many a Derby fan that the
club makes a calculated and cold hearted financial decision after years
of throwing money down the drain to the extent that their owner sold the
club’s ground to himself to further fund his frittering away the family
silver. This podcast is called Our Baseball Ground but, if things carry
on, it certainly won’t be our Pride Park and, once again, as Bury fans
can attest to, it will be the fans picking up the pieces.

## Centre Back: Lewin Nyatanga

![Lewin Nyatanga](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/pete-team/nyatanga.jpeg)

That last paragraph got a bit heavy so I shall rein myself in (I hope).
The next player follows what will soon become an underlying theme of
untapped potential. When I started following Luton Town in the 06-07
season, Lewin Nyatanga was a promising youngster at Derby. He had
finished the 05-06 season strongly, securing his place in the first team
and getting his first cap for Wales aged 17, and then... Nothing. He
struggled to get into the team and then failed upwards by landing a loan
deal at Roy Keane’s Sunderland. There was talk of him being bought
permanently but he embarked upon a succession of loans and never really
got going. Although he had a decent lower league career, he never seemed
to reach the potential he had to be Derby’s next big thing and,
according to an interview he gave to planetfooball, he started planning
his exit strategy from football as soon as he joined Bristol City.
Further, he stopped even taking any notice of football after he retired.
In a nice little twist, the player he said he idolised growing up was
Chris Powell, our left back, and he also looked up to Junior Baiano and
Stefan Eranio: two players whose names I can easily recall but nothing
else.

## Right Back: Gary Rowett

![Gary Rowett](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/pete-team/rowett.png)

This one was an interesting one for me. When Gary Rowett was appointed
Derby manager in 2017, it seemed like a match made in heaven, like
Solskjaer at Man United or Lampard at Ch... Never mind. My first memory
of him was seeing him in the 1997-98 Merlin sticker book. As some of you
will remember, the players were arranged by their position on the pitch
and the last page was always the strikers. There were some big names
there, Dean Sturridge and Paulo Wanchope to name but two, but, in the
very last space, was Gary Rowett, listed as a defender. My six year old
brain decided that he must be some maverick attacking defender which, as
someone used to the defensive stylings of the *Arsenal Back Four™*, was
incredibly exciting. He turned up in later Championship Managers as a
half decent D RC at Charlton Atheltic, before dropping down the leagues
and packing it all in at age 33. Not only was he not the player I
thought he was, but he was only at Derby for three years. Even so, he’s
in my team because this is not a serious exercise, as my writing style
makes perfectly clear.

## Left Winger: Lee Holmes

![Lee Holmes](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/pete-team/holmes.jpeg)

I must confess that this is purely a Championship Manager inclusion. In
CM 03-04, he and Tom Huddlestone (an obvious candidate for this team
which is why he’s not in it) were under 17, and so could be snaffled
very cheaply. I always signed them if I could and Lee Holmes almost
always flattered to deceive. Despite him having superb stats for a
youngster, he just never really got going, much like in his career. For
me, he will remain a huge what-if when I wistfully and pointlessly
ponder the potential he had. I suspect that, to Derby fans, he was just
another decent youngster. But, to me, he was their next great hope.

## Central Midfielder: Inigo Idiakez

![Inigo Idiakez](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/pete-team/idiakez.jpeg)

Now we’re talking! He immediately stuck out when I came across his name
because Championship clubs didn’t normally have Spanish players and he
seemed impossibly exotic. Even better, he really lived up to his billing
and for a few years, to an outsider at least, was a massive part of a
team improving towards a promotion in 2007. He helped set a precedent
followed by many a foreign star and is a rare example of someone who
seems to have been an unqualified success. He is also a coach at Luton
Town now which is nice for him, presumably.

## Central Midfielder: Matt Oakley

![Matt Oakley](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/pete-team/oakley.jpeg)

The Derby captain at the time Derby were promoted and a man who seemed
cut out for the Premier League. He had had a decent spell at Southampton
and seemed likely to be an asset to Derby in the way that Ian Ashbee,
who had come through the divisions with Hull City a few years later,
didn’t. People overplay the significance of clubs rewarding the players
who got them promoted as they often can’t cut it, but keeping Oakley in
the first team seemed like a no-brainer. He shone for Derby in a poor
team before being unceremoniously booted out in January 2008 to make
room for Robbie Savage. Say what you will about Robbie Savage’s
pedigree, and it’s likely Derby’s season would still have been a
disaster if Oakley had stayed, but it does seem like an unfathomable act
of cutting one’s nose off to spite the face. I haven’t just written this
because the Alexes praised him a few podcasts ago, I promise.

## Right Winger: Giles Barnes

![Giles Barnes](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/pete-team/barnes.jpeg)

Another player praised in a recent podcast and, for me, the pinnacle of
untapped potential at Derby. Derby were not obvious promotion candidates
in 2006-07 and there were many teams thought to be stronger bets than
Derby to go up. However, Giles Barnes seemed to take off that season and
was a major part of team that didn’t look like doing much and yet were
hard to argue with as playoff winners in the end. The 2007-08 season was
supposed to be the year that Giles Barnes showed his pedigree, got a big
move, and then took his place among the other slightly disappointing
right wingers in the England squad for Euro 2008. So his injury problems
were genuinely such a shame. He never seemed to have the career he
should have, in spite of moves to Fulham and West Brom suggesting he may
become a Premier League player, and it is surely true to say Derby would
have got more than 11 points over the season if he had stayed fit. For
one thing, Fulham were terrible that year and Derby might have beaten
them at least once.

## Striker: Steve Howard

![Steve Howard](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/pete-team/howard.jpeg)

The man, the mountain, the totem, the (insert laboured metaphor here).
Stevie Howard was a hero for Luton Town in their surprisingly successful
2005-06 season and was snapped up by Derby in the Summer. The club
really missed him, three relegations in a row with some awful players
supports that idea, and he seemed the consummate Championship player.
Huge, solid as a rock, and with a real eye for goal. He had an excellent
season for Derby, being awarded their Player of the Year and looked set
to attack the Premier League. It is likely he was not cut out for the
league but it doesn’t feel that he was given much of a chance,
especially given some of the questionable players Derby fielded that
season. I am almost certain I am viewing him through rose-tinted glasses
but, to me, he will always be the player left behind by Derby.

## Striker: Paulo Wanchope

![Paulo Wanchope](https://ourbaseballground.com/images/pete-team/wanchope.jpeg)

Taking the last spot is a player who is in this team for how little I
actually know about him compared to how well I think I know him. To me,
he was a legendary striker at the end of the 90s who I remember being a
real threat for Derby and scoring THAT goal on his debut. In reality, I
was only dimly aware of him playing up front with Dean Sturridge and I
mainly remember him for being decidedly average at Man City before they
upgraded him with Nicolas Anelka upon promotion to the Premier League in
2002, a good decision in hindsight. There is no doubt he was an
excellent player and deserves his place in Derby fans’ affections. On
the radar of non-Derby fans, but I must confess most of what I know
about him has been constructed after the event. 

## Stadium: The Baseball Ground

It has to be this. Not only because the podcast is named after this
ground, but also because the Baseball Ground is legendary among football
fans as having an appalling pitch. Pretty much every reference to
terrible pitches in the 70s, 80s and 90s follows the same pattern. Many
names are thrown out in discussion before someone remembers the Baseball
Ground and then everyone agrees it was the worst. What I wouldn’t give
to go to the Baseball Ground on a Wednesday night to see Derby play
Leeds in the mid 70s whilst wading through First World War trench
conditions to kick lumps out of each other. In the last ten years, and
only really then (if you don’t believe me, watch highlights from 2005 or
before and marvel at the state of the pitches), playing surfaces have
got much better at all levels. It seems that some of the romance of the
game has been lost. To be clear, I realise that’s stupid, and that it is
better not seeing players suffer awful injuries just because of the
playing surface, but you will have to indulge me.

## Manager: Brian Clough

I don’t even need to write anything really. Pick a number, multiply it
by infinity and you still won’t get close to the esteem in which Brian
Clough is held by neutrals, let alone Derby and Nottingham Forest fans.
The fact that he managed Derby and Forest with such distinction means he
is loved on both sides of the divide and it is probably only Leeds fans
who would say anything other than positive things about the man. He was
not perfect, Justin Fashanu among others will attest to that, and so I
would not want to gloss over his failings. However, it must be said he
was an awesome man manage,r despite not possessing key characteristics
that we would associate with that now. A man who knew the game
inside-out and had very strong principles of how the game should be
played. It nevertheless seems likely he would succeed even now, in spite
of people liking to say he wouldn’t be able to handle Paul Pogba, and
the like. Perhaps I am being a misty-eyed romantic, but he is probably
the manager from the past, along with Herbert Chapman, I would most like
to see manage nowadays. His last few years were, by all accounts,
wrought with difficulties caused by his alcoholism. However, even while
looking worse for wear on a 2002 episode of Gillette Soccer Saturday and
stumbling over his words, he was good value for a few jokes and spoke so
kindly to Jeff Stelling and the others. It was impossible not to warm to
him. A true legend of the game and an excellent place to finally stop
wittering on, after the honourable mentions of course.

## Honourable Mentions
- **Nathan Tyson** – Always seemed to have scored when I checked Derby’s results against no team more than Forest in my head. Although I have a vague recollection of him playing for them which I won’t ruin by checking it.
- **Dean Sturridge** – A stalwart of the English game and a man who seemed, to me, to score plenty of goals and be a reliable Premier League player for teams with ambitions of mid table security.
- **Will Hughes** – The most exciting player Derby seem to have produced
  in the last decade and it really is such a shame that he got injured
  on the opening day of the 2015-16 season. On a side note, the Alexes
  and I were in Spain together listening to that game (I don’t know how)
  and heard his injury being relayed by the commentator who described
  him as being in “acres of pain”. Another good example of commentators
  not being able to string a sentence together. Although, perhaps I
  should not throw that particular stone. My glass walls are looking
  quite flimsy...
- **Chris Martin** – A cracking striker for Luton in the 08-09 season, and a player Derby surely regret allowing to leave in light of their travails this season.
- **Tom Huddlestone** – A bona fide Premier League player. Obviously a very well-known player to outsiders, but too famous to make an eclectic team like this.
- **Robbie Savage** – That went well...


I have rambled on enough now so I shall stop. Thank you, if you managed
to get all the way to the end. You have indulged me talking for, wow,
over 3000 words on a subject about which I demonstrably know nothing.
Derby have not made as much of an impression on me as I might expect,
but I will also have a soft spot for them due to the Alexes. I find
their current predicament extremely sad, and I hope better times are
around the corner soon!


